---
title: Let's make things simpler
lead: We can't bash on stuff just because we feel it's too complicated. We can only make the case that simplicity is hard but more impactful/meaningful
layout: post
---

I'm currently doing a lot of Node.js work and it's great! but there are things in this world that are not so great and I would like to address a few of those things in this post. The things I write on this blog are highly opinionated and as such you should keep this in mind when you read this. This is not an exact answer to a specific question.

Let's start with `lodash` (there's nothing wrong with lodash, use it if it makes your life easier) this is, from what I can tell, a huge library with lots of auxiliary functions. With tools for doing stuff like **currying** and `Object.assign`.

To be fair, `Object.assign` doesn't appear to be supported in IE and was just recently added to the language. I'm a bit late to the game so some of this may come as a surprise but I thought we had polyfills for this sort of stuff.

What does not make any sense though is the function `_.partial` this function takes away from readability. As new person arriving in this world `_.partial` does currying in a very unintuitive way.

I would much rather prefer it if we just wrote the following code becuase the intent is much clearer and not obscrued by the intricasies of `_.partial`. I don't think there's anything wrong about being explicit. 

~~~
function AB(a, b) {
}
function B(b) {
  return function() {
    return AB('a', b)
  }
}
~~~

Also, if you really do want to curry N arguments left/right you should really consider if your design really needs this or could you do with just passing an argument as an array?

# Intervals

    (min <= a && a <= max)

The above is a straightfoward way to check if a value falls within a specifc range. It's the equiavlent of a SQL BETWEEN. Where the lower and upper bound in inclusive. There are many ways to express the above intent but I find this to be the most clear.

# Error conditions

    if (!true)

Whenever I want to test for an error condition I tend to do the following. I express the condition which is an error in the form of a Boolean expression and then negate it. if you see `if (!condition)` the condition is the error condition and the if-statement body is the error handling code. This allows us to parse the condition without considering negation (for the most part). Again, I do feel as if this leads to cleaner code with less intricacies to deal with and it's a mostly unviersal approach that would work in any language.
